I could literally stare at this thing
all day
it's gorgeous like whose object eat your
heart out the cartwheel galaxy there's
got one up on you the cartwheel galaxy
is in a very rare class of galaxies
called ring galaxies just like hugs
object which I did a video on a couple
of months ago it consists of like a
little elliptical galaxy in the center
with this beautiful bright star-forming
ring around it but unlike other ring
galaxies so it also has these spokes
that go outwards from that central
region to the ring itself which is even
more of a rare occurrence for a ring
galaxy it's about 500 million light
years away in the constellation of
sculptor and it's about 150 thousand
light years across so slightly bigger
than the Milky Way's a hundred thousand
light years across it was discovered by
Fritz Zwicky back in the thirties and he
described it as one of the most complex
structures in the universe that needs
it's dynamics explaining aka its history
of how it came to be and how its stars
are now moving in that ring and central
region and those weird spokes you'll
notice the ring in the cartwheel galaxy
is a lot brighter and bluer than the
ring in hogs object yeah sure the ring
in hogs object is blue and that does
mean that there's a lot of young stars
forming there because there are a lot
hotter and hotter things burn bluer like
a Bunsen burner or a hog flame compared
to the reddish glow of like a candle or
a fire but the ring in the cartwheel is
clearly much bluer and we see that when
we look at it in ultraviolet light as
well there's a lot more ultraviolet
light coming from this ring that is the
ring in a hose object which means it is
a lot younger of a ring the ring is also
really smooth it's not like it's clumpy
or starburst E in any way you can see
that all of the stars around that ring
have clearly formed at the exact same
time to have that same level of
brightness throughout it and we think
that was about 200 million years ago
it's very strange with that amount of
stars to form all at once usually it's a
lot more clumpy and burn
a galaxy you look at a typical spiral
galaxy and you can see the really bright
points where stars have very recently
formed in these big bursts of clumps
along the arms but in the cantwell
galaxy we essentially have that all of
the entire ring itself now the mechanism
that is usually positive to explain this
whole scenario is a head-on collision of
two galaxies not necessarily a merger
just a collision that's unlike ho's
objects or people usually say that it is
a merger of two galaxies that have
actually coalesced to form that one
thing in the cartwheel what we think has
happened is that it was a typical spiral
disc galaxy and something has literally
punched straight through the very center
of it and out to the other side it even
has two companion galaxies that we think
might be responsible for this because
when we look to see where a lot of the
gas and dust are in this system using
radio waves we can see in the contours
which trace out where the radio emission
is coming from there is essentially this
gas bridge between the center of the
cartwheel galaxy and one of those
companion galaxies around it now the
reason why a head-on collision is so
important in this scenario is because
it's very similar to like dropping a
rock into sand or the same shape you get
when an asteroid or meet your hits into
the ground of the Earth or the moon
because in those kind of collisions you
form a crater and so what happens is the
material that was once in the center of
where that rock probably impacted gets
thrown out but with the same energy in
all directions and so what you end up
forming is a perfect ring of a raised
edge of material at the edge of your
crater so if you consider that in a
head-on collision of two galaxies where
one is just gonna go straight and punch
through the other side then the energy
in that collision is gonna throw out
material equally in all directions until
you form this ring of gas in a sort of
ripple outwards and the shockwaves
involved in that process as well can
then shock the gas and cause it to start
forming stars and that's how we think
we've gotten this very very thin very
obvious bright ring like structure of
all formed at the same time and the cart
wheel spokes are then explained by
saying well the collision happened 200
million years ago or so and now that
disk galaxy is starting to reform its
spiral arms out from the center and
reattach to the ring but the thing is
when people simulate that happening it
takes a lot longer than 200 million
years it's more around the billion year
mark that disks start to reform spiral
arms after big collisions or mergers
like this so the cartwheel galaxy itself
actually casts doubt on this big picture
of the collisions emergence of galaxies
producing these rings so whilst the
cartwheel galaxy is breaking a lot of
our series on how these galaxies form
it's also a very useful laboratory to
study one of the missing pieces still
left in astronomy and astrophysics as
well
so because you have this incredibly
bright ring of stars that have all
formed at the same time you tend to get
a lot of heavier stars and also more
binary stars as well those kind of
things are gonna go supernova and end up
in neutron neutron star pairs or white
dwarf neutron star pairs or supernova
down to a black hole those kind of
objects are incredibly bright in the
x-ray part of the spectrum because
they're incredibly dense and very
energetic as well so the cartwheel
galaxy is very bright in x-rays it has a
huge abundance of x-ray sources dotted
along that ring so it's a very
interesting laboratory to probe these
heavier objects in the universe and in
particular people are very interested in
studying these x-ray sources because it
might allow us to find an intermediate
mass black hole now we have a lot of
stellar-mass black holes the things that
are about like ten times the mass of the
Sun or so and we see a lot of those in
our own galaxy because they call it
little micro lensing events that briefly
brighten background things and we know
that massive stars collapse down into
that kind of a mass of a black hole and
LIGO has spotted them with gravitational
waves etc Venice
massive black holes that are at the
center of every galaxy that are anywhere
from 10,000 times the mass of the Sun up
to say 1050 billion times the mass of
the Sun but then there's this dearth
between the two regimes where we've
never really detected anything I mean
really think there'd be this continuous
distribution of masses of black holes
right because the smaller black holes
would eventually grow and grow and grow
and grow to become the heaviest thing in
the galaxy sink the center and become
the supermassive black hole and you'd
think that we'd spot the things that are
like a hundred to a thousand solar
masses also like causing lensing in our
own galaxy brightening those background
things but we just don't really see them
you know I don't mean for most of my
videos to end up always talking about
black holes but they're just so
interesting I can't help it as soon as
the topic gets background to them in
some way I'm just like oh yeah ah so
because we don't see this continuous
distribution of masses from stellar-mass
black holes supermassive black holes it
suggests that these intermediate mass
black holes between like a hundred to a
thousand ten thousand or so solar masses
must have different ways of forming this
is for different ideas floating around
for how you might form one of these
intermediate mass black holes
specifically first one is just mergers
of smaller black holes the second one is
that you have runaway collision between
stars in clusters the third is that
their primordial black holes ie they
were formed at the very start of the
universe in the Big Bang and the fourth
one is just accretion of material by the
small bus smaller mass black holes so
after the first one merges you know my
girl has detected the merger of neutron
stars and neutron stars neutralized by
cause black holes on black holes but the
most massive thing that's ever moved
forms about 80 times the mass the Sun
you're not really kissing those
intermediate mass black hole regimes now
LIGO isn't really sensitive at those
frequencies of gravitational waves that
would be formed when something heavier
actually merged that's why we haven't
really detected anything from a
supermassive black hole merger yet
either let me know in the comments if
you actually want me to do a video on
this and what LIGO is sensitive to and
what we should detect
detect with Lego either way you know
it's difficult to confirm whether
mergers of these intermediate mass black
holes are happening or the mergers of
smaller mass black holes are forming
these intermediate mass black holes
the second idea of runaway collision of
stars in a globular cluster is getting a
lot of tension recently there was some
work in 2002 by his wart and McMillan
which showed that there was a large dark
mass in a center of a globular cluster
so they worked out the mass of the thing
in the centre had about 0.1% of the mass
of the whole cluster and said that
basically any cluster older than five
million years should have had one of
these runaway collisions and have an
intermediate mass black hole at the
center and so that's why people got
excited connecting it with the cartwheel
galaxy and all of these x-ray sources
neck has perhaps you had a black hole
accreting material from inside the
cluster itself an intermediate mass
black hole and that could explain why
the sausage was so bright in the
cartwheel galaxy as well it has what we
call ultraluminous x-ray source in there
that needs to be explained and if you've
had a lot of star formation you've
probably formed a lot of big clusters of
stars as well so very interesting Avenue
in terms of cartwheel galaxy the third
mechanism the primordial black holes you
know this is more of an idea than a
fully fledged hypothesis it's still very
much buried in the theory and the
mathematics of it all so I'm not really
gonna touch on it here but know that it
is a possible explanation for all of
this and the fourth idea is just
accretion of material by a stellar mass
black hole for example something that
starts at about ten times the mass the
Sun as the end product of the supernova
and then starts to recruit the material
around it say half the mass of the Sun a
year after like a million years that's
going to have grown quite large and as
that happens the accretion happens it
glows in x-rays so when the roast that
satellite launched back in the 90s and
we started to detect all of these
ultraluminous x-ray sources that weren't
in the centre of galaxies associated
with supermassive black holes or
creating people got very excited that
they were intermediate-mass black holes
because when you have like a neutron
star a white dwarf or a stellar mass
black hole or creasing material
yeah you get x-ray light from that but
it's nowhere near the brightness is that
row stat was starting to detect you know
these ultraluminous x-ray sources
because the cartwheel galaxy hosts seven
of these ultraluminous x-ray sources as
opposed to the one or so that most
average galaxies were actually hosts and
it was pizzolatto and collaborators in
2010 that suggested the brightest of
those ultraluminous x-ray sources could
be powered by a hundred times the mass
of the Sun black hole which is just
pushing into that intermediate-mass
black hole regime which is why there's
been so much focus on the cartwheel
galaxy then in 2012 Prestwich and
collaborators found that there was a
correlation between the number of these
ultraluminous x-ray sources in a galaxy
and the star formation rate which is
really telling in the cartwheel galaxy
because we know that that big ring of
material has formed stars all at the
same time a very high burst of star
formation rate a couple of hundred
million years ago and they said to
reproduce that correlation between the
number of ultraluminous x-ray sources
and the star formation rate of the
galaxies in models they needed to
increase the number of binary stars
formed and also the number of collisions
between stars in the clusters formed in
that star formation episode as well
which points toward like this joint
accretion and merger scenario needed to
make the ultraluminous x-ray source is
seen in the cartwheel and perhaps
suggests that intermediate-mass black
holes get to that level by both merging
I'm decreasing material so the cartwheel
galaxy is not just a pretty face is
essentially a laboratory where we can
test our biggest ideas of how galaxies
evolve and change shape through
collisions and mergers but also how
black holes themselves grow and I think
you know while preparing for this video
the cartwheel galaxy may have just moved
the penguin galaxy off the number one
spot on my list of favorite galaxies
might years away in the constellation of
oh it's not water water no brown skin
[Music]
ringing galaxies like hoje of hoobs we
did a whole video on it you gotta be
able to pronounce Hogg's
object Oh
you